# `ortac` — OCaml RunTime Assertion Checking

`ortac` is a tool to convert an OCaml module interface with [Gospel]
specifications into code to check those specifications.

[Gospel]: https://ocaml-gospel.github.io/gospel/

There are various ways to check specifications, all provided by plugins.

The _QCheck-STM_ plugin generates a program using [QCheck-STM] that will test
the module by running random functions calls and checking they give consistent
results with the model provided in the Gospel specification; see the [dedicated
README][QCheck-STM README] for details.

[QCheck-STM]: https://ocaml-multicore.github.io/multicoretests/
[QCheck-STM README]: plugins/qcheck-stm/README.md

This repository also contains two other _experimental_ plugins, that are not yet
stable. Expect rough edges if you venture to try them out:

- the _wrapper_ plugin generates _wrapper_ modules, _i.e._ modules
  exposing the original interface but instrumenting all function calls
  with assertions on arguments and on results, either normal or
  exceptional; see the [dedicated README][wrapper README] for
  details,
- the _monolith_ plugin generates programs using [Monolith] that will
  test a module by comparing it against an instrumented version of
  that module; see the [dedicated README][monolith README] for
  details.

[wrapper README]: plugins/wrapper/README.md
[monolith README]: plugins/monolith/README.md
[Monolith]: https://gitlab.inria.fr/fpottier/monolith

At its core, Ortac provides a way to convert the executable fragment of Gospel
into OCaml code. This core functionality is used by all plugins.


## Installation

The easiest way to try `ortac` out is to `opam install` its main packages
directly from the opam repository:

```
opam install ortac-qcheck-stm ortac-runtime
```

This will install the following OPAM packages:

- `ortac-core.opam` which provides the `ortac` command-line tool and the core
  functionality used by all plugins,
- `ortac-runtime.opam` which provides the support library for the code
  generated by Ortac plugins,
- `ortac-qcheck-stm.opam` which provides the QCheck-STM plugin for the
  `ortac` command-line tool.

Alternatively, you can install the packages directly from this repository using
`opam pin`:

```
opam pin add -y https://github.com/ocaml-gospel/ortac.git
```

Besides the first three packages, this will also install the following
_experimental_ packages:

- `ortac-wrapper.opam` which provides the wrapper plugin for the `ortac`
  command-line tool,
- `ortac-monolith.opam` which provides the Monolith plugin for the
  `ortac` command-line tool,
- `ortac-runtime-monolith.opam` which provides the support library for
  the code generated with the Monolith plugin.
- `ortac-dune.opam` which provides a dune rule generator.

Even using `opam pin`, you can install only some of those packages by explicitly
mentioning which package you want to install, for instance:

```
$ opam pin add ortac-core https://github.com/ocaml-gospel/ortac.git
```

To check that it is correctly installed, simply run `ortac`. If you
installed all packages, you should get:

```
$ ortac
ortac: required COMMAND name is missing, must be one of 'monolith', 'qcheck-stm' or 'wrapper'.
Usage: ortac COMMAND …
Try 'ortac --help' for more information.
```


## Quick start

or: How to use Ortac to test whether the specifications of a module
hold.


### QCheck-STM plugin

The QCheck-STM plugin can generate a standalone executable that will
test the consistency between the behaviour of the functions of the
module and their model, as provided by the Gospel specifications. Look
at the [dedicated README][QCheck-STM README] for the QCheck-STM plugin
to see how it can be used.


### Monolith plugin

The Monolith plugin can generate a standalone executable that will try
to falsify the Gospel specifications of a module by stress-testing the
code. Look in the [dedicated README][monolith README] for the Monolith
plugin to see how it can be used.


### Wrapper plugin

The wrapper plugin can be used to generate a _wrapper_ module that
will expose the same interface as the original module but
instrumenting all function calls with assertions corresponding to the
Gospel specifications. Look in the [dedicated README][wrapper README]
for the wrapper plugin to see how it can be used.


## Supported Gospel

The main general limitation on what Gospel specifications are supported comes
from the translation from Gospel into OCaml: it is only possible to translate
the executable fragment of the Gospel language. In particular, it does not
support quantifications except in the very specific patterns in which they
quantify over an integer within explicit bounds such as:

```
forall i. a < i < b -> ...
exists i. a < i < b /\ ...
```

(the pattern matching tolerates some small variations in the way bounds are
stated, such as `b >= i > a`, etc. but not much more).

Additionally, each plugin has its own set of constraints on what it
can handle. See the dedicated READMEs for details.

## Found issues

The QCheck-STM plugin has already proven itself useful as it has discovered a
number of issues:

- [A missing check of index out of bound in the `varray` library](https://github.com/art-w/varray/pull/1)
- [An undefined behaviour still in the `varray` library](https://github.com/art-w/varray/issues/2)
- [Some integer overflows in the `bitv` library](https://github.com/backtracking/bitv/issues/31)
- [A peculiar behaviour in `Hashtbl.create` from the standard library](https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/issues/13469)
