# QCheck-STM plugin for Ortac

This directory contains a plugin for [Ortac] that can generate a
standalone executable using [QCheck-STM] to perform model-based
state-machine testing of a module by using the model of its Gospel
specifications.

[Ortac]: ../../README.md
[QCheck-STM]: https://ocaml-multicore.github.io/multicoretests/

## Installation

Follow the global [installation instructions] in the main README of
this repository. The QCheck-STM plugin is provided by the
`ortac-qcheck-stm` OPAM package, which depends on the `ortac-core` and
`ortac-runtime` packages.

[installation instructions]: ../../README.md#installation


## Quick start

The QCheck-STM plugin can be used to generate a program using the
[QCheck-STM] library to test the consistency between the actual
behaviours of the functions of a module and their expected behaviours
as specified by their Gospel model.

Let’s start with a module `lib.mli` defining a (array-like) data
structure containing some Gospel specifications:

```ocaml
type 'a t
(*@ model size : int
    mutable model contents : 'a list *)

val make : int -> 'a -> 'a t
(*@ t = make i a
    checks i >= 0
    ensures t.size = i
    ensures t.contents = List.init i (fun j -> a) *)

val get : 'a t -> int -> 'a
(*@ a = get t i
    checks 0 <= i < t.size
    ensures a = List.nth t.contents i *)

val set : 'a t -> int -> 'a -> unit
(*@ set t i a
    checks 0 <= i < t.size
    modifies t.contents
    ensures t.contents = List.mapi (fun j x -> if j = (i : integer) then a else x) (old t.contents) *)
```

To generate a QCheck-STM test program for that library, you must
indicate:

- the type of the system under test, for instance `char t`, where the
  type `t` must have a Gospel model that will be used as the model
  state by the QCheck-STM library,
- how to generate an initial value of that type, for instance
  `make 16 'a'`.

You can do so with the following `lib_conf.ml` file:

```ocaml
open Lib
type sut = char t
let init_sut = make 16 'a'
```

You can then run:

```shell
$ ortac qcheck-stm lib.mli lib_conf.ml
```

to generate the corresponding QCheck-STM program. The [QCheck-STM
documentation] explains the structure of a specification such as the
one that is generated by the plugin.

[QCheck-STM documentation]: https://ocaml.org/p/qcheck-stm/latest/doc/index.html

You can then save this module into a file:

```shell
$ ortac qcheck-stm lib.mli lib_conf.ml -o main.ml
```

and compile this into an executable using:

- the library `Lib` itself, obviously,
- the libraries `qcheck-core`, `qcheck-stm.sequential` and `ortac-runtime`.

With `dune`, the configuration would then look something like:

```dune
(executable
 (name main)
 (libraries lib qcheck-core qcheck-stm.sequential ortac-runtime))
```

From there, you can run the program directly for random testing:

```shell
$ ./path/to/main.exe
```

## Using the dune-rules plugin

When using the [QCheck-STM] plugin in a testing setup the creation of the
required dune files can be automated with the dune-rules plugin. See the
[dedicated README][dune-rules README] for details.

[dune-rules README]: ../dune-rules/README.md

## Supported Gospel and other limitations

The QCheck-STM plugin currently has some limitations on what Gospel
specifications are supported.

First of all it inherits the limitations of the translation from
Gospel to OCaml provided by the core of Ortac, as listed in the [main
README].

[main README]: ../../README.md#supported-gospel

It also inherits the limitations of QCheck-STM. In particular, it can
track the state of only one value, which has the consequence that
functions expecting more than one argument of type `t` or returning
values of type `t` are not tested.

At the moment, the plugin comes with the following limiting
expectations:

- every argument of the functions that will be tested will be
  generated using the generator of [`QCheck.Gen`] whose name matches
  the type of that argument,
- when a function modifies the model state, it must come with a
  specification `ensures t.field = expr` for every field that
  is modified, where `expr` must be computable with only the `old`
  state,
- the specification of the function that is used to generate the
  initial value of the system under test (`make` in the small example
  above) must come with a specification `ensures t.field = ...` for
  every field of the model so that the initial state can be computed.

[`QCheck.Gen`]: https://ocaml.org/p/qcheck-core/latest/doc/QCheck/Gen/index.html

## Acknowledgment

This plugin is based on an early proof of concept written by Naomi Spargo.
